THE PATENTS ACT, 1970
(Act No. 39 of 1970)
[As amended by the Patents (Amendment) Act, 2005]

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Patents Act, 1970.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Section 2. Definitions.
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(j) "invention" means a new product or process involving an inventive step and capable of industrial application;
(ja) "inventive step" means a feature of an invention that involves technical advance as compared to the existing knowledge or having economic significance or both and that makes the invention not obvious to a person skilled in the art;
(l) "new invention" means any invention or technology which has not been anticipated by publication in any document or used in the country or elsewhere in the world before the date of filing of patent application with complete specification, that is to say, which has not fallen in public domain or that it does not form part of the state of the art;
(m) "patent" means a patent for any invention granted under this Act;
(ta) "pharmaceutical substance" means any new entity involving one or more inventive steps.

CHAPTER II - INVENTIONS NOT PATENTABLE

Section 3. What are not inventions.
The following are not inventions within the meaning of this Act,—
(a) an invention which is frivolous or which claims anything obviously contrary to well established natural laws;
(b) an invention the primary or intended use or commercial exploitation of which would be contrary to public order or morality or which causes serious prejudice to human, animal or plant life or health or to the environment;
(c) the mere discovery of a scientific principle or the formulation of an abstract theory or discovery of any living thing or non-living substance occurring in nature;
(d) the mere discovery of a new form of a known substance which does not result in the enhancement of the known efficacy of that substance or the mere discovery of any new property or new use for a known substance or of the mere use of a known process, machine or apparatus unless such known process results in a new product or employs at least one new reactant.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, salts, esters, ethers, polymorphs, metabolites, pure form, particle size, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes, combinations and other derivatives of known substance shall be considered to be the same substance, unless they differ significantly in properties with regard to efficacy;
(e) a substance obtained by a mere admixture resulting only in the aggregation of the properties of the components thereof or a process for producing such substance;
(h) a method of agriculture or horticulture;
(i) any process for the medicinal, surgical, curative, prophylactic, diagnostic, therapeutic or other treatment of human beings or any process for a similar treatment of animals to render them free of disease or to increase their economic value or that of their products;
(j) plants and animals in whole or any part thereof other than micro-organisms; but including seeds, varieties and species and essentially biological processes for production or propagation of plants and animals;
(p) an invention which in effect is traditional knowledge or which is an aggregation or duplication of known properties of traditionally known component or components.

Section 4. Inventions relating to atomic energy not patentable.
No patent shall be granted in respect of an invention relating to atomic energy falling within sub-section (1) of section 20 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.

CHAPTER III - APPLICATIONS FOR PATENTS

Section 10. Contents of specifications.
(1) Every specification, whether provisional or complete, shall describe the invention.
(4) Every complete specification shall—
(a) fully and particularly describe the invention and its operation or use and the method by which it is to be performed;
(b) disclose the best method of performing the invention which is known to the applicant and for which he is entitled to claim protection;
(c) end with a claim or claims defining the scope of the invention for which protection is claimed;
(d) be accompanied by an abstract to provide technical information on the invention:
Provided that—
(ii) if the applicant mentions a biological material in the specification which may not be described in such a way as to satisfy clauses (a) and (b), and if such material is not available to the public, the application shall be completed by depositing the material to an authorized international depository authority under the Budapest Treaty and disclosing the source and geographical origin of the biological material in the specification.

CHAPTER V - OPPOSITION PROCEEDINGS TO GRANT OF PATENTS

Section 25. Opposition to the grant of patent.
(1) Where an application for a patent has been published but a patent has not been granted, any person may, in writing, represent by way of opposition to the Controller against the grant of patent on the ground—
(d) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of that claim;
(f) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act, or is not patentable under this Act;
(j) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;
(k) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere.

CHAPTER VIII - GRANT OF PATENTS AND RIGHTS CONFERRED THEREBY

Section 48. Rights of patentees.
Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act and the conditions specified in section 47, a patent granted under this Act shall confer upon the patentee—
(a) where the subject matter of the patent is a product, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of making, using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes that product in India;
(b) where the subject matter of the patent is a process, the exclusive right to prevent third parties, who do not have his consent, from the act of using that process, and from the act of using, offering for sale, selling or importing for those purposes the product obtained directly by that process in India.

CHAPTER XII - REVOCATION OF PATENTS

Section 64. Revocation of patents.
(1) A patent, whether granted before or after the commencement of this Act, may, be revoked on a petition of any person interested or of the Central Government by the High Court or on a counter-claim in a suit for infringement of the patent by the High Court on any of the following grounds, namely:—
(d) that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of this Act;
(e) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is not new, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India before the priority date of the claim or to what was published in India or elsewhere in any of the documents referred to in section 13;
(p) that the complete specification does not disclose or wrongly mentions the source or geographical origin of biological material used for the invention;
(q) that the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification was anticipated having regard to the knowledge, oral or otherwise, available within any local or indigenous community in India or elsewhere.
