THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940
(Act No. 23 of 1940)

CHAPTER I - INTRODUCTORY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Section 3. Definitions.
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,—
(a) "Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug" includes all medicines intended for internal or external use for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of disease or disorder in human beings or animals, and manufactured exclusively in accordance with the formulae described in, the authoritative books of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Tibb systems of medicine, specified in the First Schedule;
(b) "drug" includes all medicines for internal or external use of human beings or animals and all substances intended to be used for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of any disease or disorder in human beings or animals;
(h) "patent or proprietary medicine" means,—
(i) in relation to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine all formulations containing only such ingredients as are mentioned in the formulae described in the authoritative books of Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani Tibb systems of medicine specified in the First Schedule, but does not include a medicine which is administered by parenteral route and also a medicine which consists of any substance which is not mentioned in the said books.

CHAPTER IV-A - PROVISIONS RELATING TO AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA AND UNANI DRUGS

Section 33A. Application of Chapter IV-A.
This Chapter shall apply only to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.

Section 33C. Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board.
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette and with effect from such date as may be specified therein, constitute a Board (to be called the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board) to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of this Act.

Section 33D. The Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee.
(1) The Central Government may constitute a Committee to be called the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee to advise the Central Government, the State Governments and the Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any matter tending to secure uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Act.

Section 33EEA. Adulterated drugs.
For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be adulterated,—
(a) if it consists, in whole or in part, of any filthy, putrid or decomposed substance; or
(b) if it has been prepared, packed or stored under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been contaminated with filth or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health; or
(c) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health.

Section 33EEB. Spurious drugs.
For the purposes of this Chapter, an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug shall be deemed to be spurious,—
(a) if it is sold, or offered or exhibited for sale, under a name which belongs to another drug; or
(b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles another drug in a manner likely to deceive, or bears upon itself or upon its label or container the name of another drug, unless it is plainly and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such other drug; or
(c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or company purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is fictitious or does not exist.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 3(a)]
A. AYURVEDIC SYSTEM

1. Arogya Kalpadruma
2. Arka Prakasha
3. Arya Bhishak
4. Ashtanga Hridaya
5. Ashtanga Samgraha
6. Ayurveda Kalpadruma
7. Ayurveda Prakasha
8. Ayurveda Samgraha
9. Bhaishajya Ratnavali
10. Bharat Bhaishajya Ratnakara
11. Bhavaprakasha
12. Brihat Nighantu Ratnakara
13. Charaka Samhita
14. Chakra Datta
15. Gada Nigraha
16. Kupi Pakva Rasayana
17. Nighantu Ratnakara
18. Rasa Chandansu
19. Rasamritam
20. Rasa Prakasha Sudhakara
21. Rasaka Pradipika
22. Rasendra Sara Samgraha
23. Rasa Ratna Samuchaya
24. Sahasrayogam
25. Sarva Roga Nidanam
26. Sharangadhara Samhita
27. Siddha Bhaishajya Manimala
28. Siddha Yoga Samgraha
29. Sushruta Samhita
30. Vaidya Chintamani
31. Vaidyaka Shabda Sindhu
32. Vaidyaka Chikitsa Sara
33. Vaidya Jivana
34. Yogaratnakara
35. Yoga Tarangini
36. Yoga Chintamani
37. Ayurvedic Formulary of India
38. Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India
