THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS RULES, 1945
PART XVI - MANUFACTURE FOR SALE OF AYURVEDIC, SIDDHA OR UNANI DRUGS

Rule 158B. Guidelines for issue of licence with respect to Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.
(1) Category of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani (ASU) medicines:
(A) Classical Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs:
Medicines manufactured strictly in accordance with the authoritative books specified in the First Schedule to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
(B) Patent or Proprietary (P&P) Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs:
Formulations containing ingredients mentioned in the authoritative books specified in the First Schedule to the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, but does not include classical medicine.
(2) Proof of safety and effectiveness for Patent or Proprietary ASU medicines:
(a) For grant of licence to manufacture for sale of Patent or Proprietary medicine containing single or poly-herbal/mineral/animal ingredients, evidence of safety and effectiveness shall be provided as follows:
(i) Formulations containing ingredients mentioned in the First Schedule books for indications mentioned in those texts: Safety data through published literature and citation from authoritative texts.
(ii) Formulations containing ingredients mentioned in the First Schedule books for new indications: Published scientific literature or pilot clinical studies.
(iii) Formulations containing ingredients with altered ratios or novel extraction processes: Safety assessment studies and proof of effectiveness through published scientific literature or clinical trials.

Rule 161. Labelling, packing and limit of alcohol in Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drugs.
(1) There shall be conspicuously displayed on the label of the container or package of an Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani drug:
(a) The name of the drug as specified in the First Schedule books or patent/proprietary name.
(b) A correct statement of the net content.
(c) The name and address of the manufacturer.
(d) The manufacturing licence number preceded by the words "Mfg. Lic. No." or "M. L.".
(e) A distinctive batch number.
(f) The date of manufacture.
