WIPO TREATY ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, GENETIC RESOURCES AND ASSOCIATED TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE
[Adopted by the Diplomatic Conference on May 24, 2024]

Article 1. Objectives.
The objectives of this Treaty are to:
(a) enhance the efficacy, transparency and quality of the patent system in relation to genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources; and
(b) prevent patents from being granted erroneously for inventions that are not novel or inventive with respect to genetic resources and traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources.

Article 2. Use of Terms.
For the purposes of this Treaty:
(a) "Applicant" means the person in whose name a patent application is filed, or another person who is applying for the patent;
(b) "Genetic Resources" are genetic material of actual or potential value;
(c) "Traditional Knowledge Associated with Genetic Resources" means substantive knowledge of the properties and uses of genetic resources and their derivatives held by Indigenous Peoples and local communities.

Article 3. Mandatory Disclosure Requirement.
(1) Where the claimed invention in a patent application is materially based on genetic resources, each Contracting Party shall require applicants to disclose:
(a) the country of origin of the genetic resources, or,
(b) if the country of origin is not known, the source of the genetic resources.
(2) Where the claimed invention in a patent application is materially based on traditional knowledge associated with genetic resources, each Contracting Party shall require applicants to disclose:
(a) the Indigenous Peoples or local community that provided the traditional knowledge, or,
(b) if the Indigenous Peoples or local community is not known, the source of the traditional knowledge.

Article 4. Sanctions and Remedies.
(1) Each Contracting Party shall put in place appropriate, effective and proportionate legal, administrative, and/or judicial measures to address an applicant's failure to provide the information required in Article 3.
(2) Each Contracting Party shall provide the applicant an opportunity to rectify a failure to disclose the required information before applying sanctions or remedies.
(3) Subject to paragraph (4), no Contracting Party shall revoke, invalidate or render unenforceable a patent solely on the basis of a failure to disclose the information specified in Article 3.
(4) Each Contracting Party may provide for post-grant sanctions or remedies where there has been fraudulent intent to deceive in respect of the disclosure requirement in Article 3.
