THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002
(Act No. 18 of 2003)
[As amended by the Biological Diversity (Amendment) Act, 2023 (Act No. 10 of 2023)]

CHAPTER I - PRELIMINARY

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Section 2. Definitions.
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "benefit claimers" means the conservers of biological resources, their by-products, creators and holders of knowledge and information relating to the use of such biological resources, innovations and practices associated with such use and application;
(b) "biological diversity" means the variability among living organisms from all sources and the ecological complexes of which they are part;
(c) "biological resources" means plants, animals and micro-organisms or parts thereof, their genetic material and by-products (excluding value added products) with actual or potential use or value, but does not include human genetic material;
(f) "commercial utilization" means end uses of biological resources for commercial utilization such as drugs, industrial enzymes, food flavours, fragrance, cosmetics, emulsifiers, oleoresins, colours, extracts and genes used for improving crops and livestock through genetic intervention, but does not include conventional breeding or traditional practices in use in any agriculture, horticulture, poultry, dairy farming, animal husbandry or bee keeping;
(fa) "cultivated medicinal plants" means plants which are cultivated by farmers or traditional practitioners;
(p) "value added products" means products which may contain portions or extracts of plants and animals in unrecognizable and physically inseparable form.

CHAPTER II - REGULATION OF ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY

Section 3. Certain persons not to undertake certain activities without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.
(1) No person referred to in sub-section (2) shall, without previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority, obtain any biological resource occurring in India or knowledge associated thereto for research or for commercial utilization or for bio-survey and bio-utilization.
(2) The persons who shall be required to take the approval of the National Biodiversity Authority under sub-section (1) are the following, namely:—
(a) a person who is not a citizen of India;
(b) a citizen of India, who is a non-resident as defined in clause (30) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(c) a body corporate, association or organization—
(i) not incorporated or registered in India; or
(ii) incorporated or registered in India under any law for the time being in force which has any non-Indian participation in its share capital or management.

Section 4. Results of research not to be transferred to certain persons without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.
No person shall, without the previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority, transfer the results of any research relating to any biological resources occurring in, or obtained from, India, in respect of which approval has been granted under section 3, to any person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3.

Section 6. Application for intellectual property rights not to be made without approval of National Biodiversity Authority.
(1) No person shall apply for any intellectual property right, by whatever name called, in or outside India for any invention based on any research or information on a biological resource obtained from India without obtaining the previous approval of the National Biodiversity Authority before grant of such intellectual property right:
Provided that in case of any application for patent, permission of the National Biodiversity Authority may be obtained after the acceptance of the patent but before the sealing of the patent by the patent authority concerned:
Provided further that the National Biodiversity Authority shall dispose of the application for permission made to it within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the application.
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may, while granting the approval under this section, impose benefit sharing fee or royalty or conditions on the commercial utilization of the rights granted.

Section 7. Prior intimation to State Biodiversity Board for obtaining biological resource for certain purposes.
(1) No person, who is a citizen of India or a body corporate, association or organization which is registered in India, shall obtain any biological resource for commercial utilization, or bio-survey and bio-utilization for commercial utilization except after giving prior intimation to the State Biodiversity Board concerned:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the local people and communities of the area, including growers and cultivators of biological resources, and vaids and hakims, who have been practicing indigenous medicine.

CHAPTER V - NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY

Section 21. Determination of equitable benefit sharing by National Biodiversity Authority.
(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall while granting approvals under section 3, section 4 and section 6 ensure that the terms and conditions subject to which approval is granted secures equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of accessed biological resources, their by-products, innovations and practices associated with their use and applications and knowledge relating thereto in accordance with mutually agreed terms and conditions between the person applying for such approval, local bodies concerned and the benefit claimers.

CHAPTER XI - MISCELLANEOUS

Section 40. Power of Central Government to exempt certain biological resources.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, in consultation with the National Biodiversity Authority, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply to any items, including biological resources normally traded as commodities or to the items derived from cultivated medicinal plants.
